The hardships of the Great Depression and the impact of World War II on America are put on display in Russell Baker’s Growing Up. During this tumultuous time in America’s history, the principles of the nation and its citizenry were tested as it tried to recover from economic disaster and announce itself as the premier nation in the world. Many Americans had to change their way of life in accordance with the times, leading to a generation that understood the necessities of life. In sum, Growing Up is about how America’s citizens handled common hardships as nation and learned how to change its ideals to thrive in the modern era of the world through the evolution of the American Dream, the changing definition of the American woman, and the treatment of the second World War.

Before the Great Depression began, the American Dream had belonged to anyone that had the willpower to work towards it. One’s resolve to work toward their goals, no matter the hardships they must face, was the key factor in whether they achieved their dreams or not. This was especially true for Sara Smolinsky in Bread Givers, for she gave up the familiarity of family and the Jewish community for the opportunity to become her own woman and chase her own American Dream. When the Great Depression hit, these opportunities disappeared for many people. To do as Sara had done and leave home without a steady job already would have been essentially suicide, for the jobs were now few and far between. This is shown in the letters between Lucy Elizabeth and Oluf with regards to both searching for a job. In a letter Oluf had wrote to Lucy who had said Aunt Pat was going to find her a job, he responded “How in the world could Pat get a job for you? You know jobs today don’t hang on trees.” (Baker) Oluf was bouncing between jobs himself at the time, and eventually according to Russell, Oluf’s “enthusiasm was muted down to, ‘Well it will all come out OK, I hope so.’” (Baker) Life in the Great Depression for many boiled down to that hope of everything eventually being okay. For Russell, it seemed that the Depression had tempered his own American Dream. Although he had the dream of being a writer since he was young, it didn’t truly present itself as an opportunity until after Russell had come home from his training for being a naval pilot. In the period between his childhood and returning from training, Russell had no true plan. He focused on the advancement of his academics, but when the time came for him to leave high school, he didn’t have the skills needed for employment in many of the labor trades. Luckily, he was able to get a scholarship to Johns Hopkins and continue his academic career there. After the war was over, he used his GI Bill to finish his schooling and was steered to a job with the Baltimore Sun by his writing professor. This was well after the Depression was over, but its impact on Russell seemed to leave him with little motivation with how he wrote of these experiences. It seemed like he was bouncing from one part of his life to the next without much concern, or rather surviving like he had seen his family do. Russell’s American Dream became surviving and getting by because that is what he had seen his entire life, and that also rang true for many others in the era.

The American woman, within the timeframe of Russell’s younger life, had undergone a drastic change from the Gilded Age. Feminism was on the rise and had already made its most significant change with the 19th Amendment in 1920. Compared to the women in Sara Smolinsky’s family, women were beginning to hold equal status in the household, or at least Russell’s mother was. The transformation had not yet been completed yet though, as there were women like Lucy who, as Russell described, “wanted the equality, but she also wanted to be a lady.” (Baker) Lucy was still adhering to the old ideals of treasuring women as mere assets while also wanting the equality among men. This complication led to conflicts across generational gaps, seen in Lucy’s conflicts with Ida Rebecca and Mimi. With Ida, there was conflict due to Lucy’s looks, education, and child-rearing, all of which were in contrast with the traditional ways Ida had grown up with. Mimi clashed with Lucy because she not as lady-like as Lucy believed women should be, seen in Mimi’s consumption of alcohol, use of makeup, and living by herself, even though Mimi made her own way in the world and was equal to many men at the time. Lucy was a woman who was caught between those two generations, and as such seen the bad in both of them, even though she shared characteristics with both women.

World War II in America was seen as a necessity to combat the fascists of the world. Russell self-admittedly was disengaged from the political discourse, but his peers at City College were aware of the dangers forming in Europe. Russell found this out during his trial before the Honor Society when he was grilled with questions like "What's your opinion about the split between Stalin and Trotsky?" (Baker) Among the adults, many reacted to news of Hitler’s and Stalin’s nonaggression pact with fears of war, and Herb knew that America would be in the war before long. While the working class was still dealing with the Depression, American intellectuals debated America’s role in the war. Even if Japan hadn’t attacked Pearl Harbor, the attitude amongst the elite seemed to say that America would enter the war to prevent the spread of fascism. With what was seen after the war, with America spreading democracy to wherever it could, this assessment can be seen as correct. America had assumed the role of the guardian of democracy, and it would not settle for nothing less than uprooting the fascist evils that threatened it.

The America in Growing Up was one of great change, with the nation moving towards its eventual place as greatest in the world. However, this period shown that there must sometimes be hardship for a nation to truly find its way in the world. The lessons taught by the Great Depression and the second World War were of vital importance for Americans to understand how they must change themselves as a country to become truly great. With the previous American Dream shattered, women working towards their true independence, and the understanding that democracy must flow freely in the world, America was finally in position to let the world know that it was ready to exert its influence and become something greater than what its founders could have hoped for.

